---
title: Running Elm apps
lead: From your editor to the browser
author: Ingar Almklov
links:
  - title: Elm installation instructions
    link: https://guide.elm-lang.org/install.html
    body: Official guide for installing and running Elm
  - title: elm-live
    link: https://github.com/wking-io/elm-live
    body: Repository for elm-live
  - title: create-elm-app
    link: https://github.com/halfzebra/create-elm-app/
    body: Repo for create-elm-app
---

In this blog post we will examine different ways of getting your Elm app to run in the browser.
We will start with the simplest possible solution and work our way up to production-ready project scaffolding tools.

# elm make

```shell
$ elm make src/Main.elm
```

The simplest way of getting your Elm app to run in the browser is arguably just by using the compiler directly.
It takes one or more `.elm` files as input and outputs an `index.html` file that can be opened in the browser. This `.html` file will contain a `<script>` tag with the compiled JavaScript output of your Elm code.

See also

```shell
$ elm make --help
```

for more information on how to use `elm make`

# elm reactor

Running `elm make` each time you make a change to your code can quickly become tiresome. Therefore, `elm reactor` exists. If you run

```shell
$ elm reactor
```

in the directory where your code lives, it will start a small web server on [http://localhost:8000/]().
If you go to this page and navigate to your `.elm` file it will automatically compile your code and run it in your browser.
If you make changes to your code, all you have to do is reload your browser window to see the updated output.

# [elm-live](https://github.com/wking-io/elm-live)

Not having to run the compiler manually for each change is pretty smooth, but what if we didn't even have to reload our browser window to see new changes?
Enter `elm-live`. `elm-live` is a more complete "dev server" that includes something called called "live reload" to achieve this.

If you give `elm-live` a `.elm` file it wil spin up a server (by default on [http://localhost:8000/]()) that recompiles your program and reloads the web page each time you change a file. Neat!

```shell
$ elm-live src/Main.elm
```

See [`elm-live`'s GitHub repo](https://github.com/wking-io/elm-live) for more information on what it can do.

# [create-elm-app](https://github.com/halfzebra/create-elm-app)

`create-elm-app` is an even more full-featured tool that is inspired by [create-react-app](https://github.com/facebook/create-react-app).
With it you can quickly get a complete Elm application up and running in seconds.

Crash course:

```shell
$ npm install create-elm-app -g # installs create-elm-app globally
$ create-elm-app my-app # creates an Elm app in a folder called my-app
$ cd my-app/
```

This will create all the files you need for a complete Elm application.

Now you can run

```shell
elm-app start
```

to open your app in the browser.
As with `elm-live` it will recompile and reload your web browser when you change files!

`create-elm-app` will create a `README.md` file with more information on how to use it.

### Pro-tip

If you use this on a real-world project with multiple collaborators it might be a good idea to have a project-local installation of `create-elm-app` so that you don't have to rely on each team member having the same version installed.

To achieve this, do the following

```shell
$ npm init -y # creates a package.json file
$ npm install create-elm-app # adds create-elm-app as a local dependency
```

Then, open up `package.json` and change the `script` node to the following:

```json
  "scripts": {
    "start": "elm-app start",
    "test": "elm-app test",
    "build": "elm-app build"
  },
```

Now when someone clones your repository, all the have to do is run `npm install` and `npm start` to install everything they need and run the application.
