---
title: No nulls in Elm
lead: How to deal with absent values
author: Ragnhild Aalvik
links:
  - title: Error Handling - Maybe
    link: https://guide.elm-lang.org/error_handling/maybe.html
    body: Official guide on the Maybe type
  - title: Two Talking Maybes is Maybe Too Many
    link: https://www.brianthicks.com/post/2016/09/26/two-talking-maybes-is-maybe-too-many/
    body: Think through how you use Maybes
---

Elm, as mentioned earlier, is claimed to have "no runtime exceptions". A big reason for this almost-fact is that Elm doesn't allow the use of `null`. Whenever a value may not be present we are forced to explicitly tell this to the compiler, using the `Maybe` construct.

## What are Maybes

Looking back at the `User` example from an earlier article we remember that one of the fields had the type `Maybe String`:

```elm
type alias User =
    { loggedIn : Bool
    , username : Maybe String
    , administrator : Bool
    }
```

As we probably remember this meant that the username `String` might be there, but only if the user is logged in. If the user isn't logged in we have no username to put into the `User` record. In that case we may be tempted to just insert `null`, but we know that that's not allowed. In Elm we would instead insert the value `Nothing`. This may not sound very helpful, didn't we just replace `null` with another absent value? Be patient, the cool thing is in how we use `Maybes`. We will come to that in a second.

The `Maybe` construct is a custom type which either has value `Just value` or `Nothing`:

```elm
type Maybe a
    = Just a
    | Nothing
```

Notice that `Maybe` is generic over type `a`, which could be anything (an Int, String, List String...). In the `User` example above `a` is a `String`. Think of `Maybe` as a wrapper around any value that may or may not be there, which we must explicitly handle in both cases.

## Using Maybes

The most common way of handling `Maybes` is by case expressions:

```elm
getHighscoreText : Maybe Int -> String
getHighscoreText maybeScore =
    case maybeScore of
        Just score ->
            "Current highscore: " ++ String.fromInt score

        Nothing ->
            "No highscore yet."
```

Here the `getHighScoreText` function takes a highscore wrapped in a `Maybe`, and should return a meaningful message. We unwrap the highscore value with a case expression, and we are forced to explicitly say what happens if the value is there, and what happens if it is not. The program simply won't compile if you haven't handled both cases. This makes the program more robust since we cannot accidentally have a missing value.

## Other ways of dealing with Maybes

Case expressions isn't the only way of dealing with a `Maybe`. The `Maybe` module includes some convenient functions. Two of the most useful ones are `Maybe.withDefault` and `Maybe.map`. Here is what they look like and how to use them:

```elm
Maybe.withDefault : a -> Maybe a -> a

Maybe.withDefault 0 (Just 4)        -- 4
Maybe.withDefault 0 Nothing         -- 0

Maybe.map : (a -> b) -> Maybe a -> Maybe b

Maybe.map (String.fromInt) (Just 4) -- Just "4"
Maybe.map (String.fromInt) Nothing  -- Nothing
```

`Maybe.withDefault` is used for unwrapping a `Maybe` just like case expressions. It returns the value inside the `Just` or returns the given default value if the value was `Nothing`.

`Maybe.map` is used when you want to change the value inside the `Maybe` (if present), and wrap it inside a `Maybe` again. The function given as an argument is applied to the value if it is there, and if the value is `Nothing` then nothing (😆) happens and `Nothing` is returned.

## Library functions returning Maybes

When using Elm you will meet `Maybes` all the time. Library functions that may fail will always return a Maybe (or a similar construct such as [Result](https://package.elm-lang.org/packages/elm/core/latest/Result)). For example the list function `List.head`, which should return the first element of the list, will return the element in a `Maybe` since the list may be empty.

## Summary

When deciding types for the values in your program try to think if some of them would fit better as `Maybes`. If for example a variable doesn't have a meaningful initial value, then it might be worth considering a `Maybe`.

All in all, play around with [Ellie](https://ellie-app.com/) and try to get comfortable with `Maybes`!
